INTRODUCTION

  The USB serial driver currently supports a number of different USB to
  serial converter products, as well as some devices that use a serial
  interface from userspace to talk to the device.

  See the individual product section below for specific information about
  the different devices.


CONFIGURATION

  Currently the driver can handle up to 256 different serial interfaces at
  one time. 

    The major number that the driver uses is 188 so to use the driver,
    create the following nodes:
	mknod /dev/ttyUSB0 c 188 0
	mknod /dev/ttyUSB1 c 188 1
	mknod /dev/ttyUSB2 c 188 2
	mknod /dev/ttyUSB3 c 188 3
		.
		.
		.
	mknod /dev/ttyUSB254 c 188 254
	mknod /dev/ttyUSB255 c 188 255

  When the device is connected and recognized by the driver, the driver
  will print to the system log, which node(s) the device has been bound
  to.
  

SPECIFIC DEVICES SUPPORTED


ConnectTech WhiteHEAT 4 port converter

  ConnectTech has been very forthcoming with information about their
  device, including providing a unit to test with.

  The driver is officially supported by Connect Tech Inc.
  http://www.connecttech.com

  For any questions or problems with this driver, please contact
  Connect Tech's Support Department at support@connecttech.com


HandSpring Visor, Palm USB, and Clié USB driver

  This driver works with all HandSpring USB, Palm USB, and Sony Clié USB
  devices.

  Only when the device tries to connect to the host, will the device show
  up to the host as a valid USB device. When this happens, the device is
  properly enumerated, assigned a port, and then communication _should_ be
  possible. The driver cleans up properly when the device is removed, or
  the connection is canceled on the device.

  NOTE:
    This means that in order to talk to the device, the sync button must be
    pressed BEFORE trying to get any program to communicate to the device.
    This goes against the current documentation for pilot-xfer and other
    packages, but is the only way that it will work due to the hardware
    in the device.
  
  When the device is connected, try talking to it on the second port
  (this is usually /dev/ttyUSB1 if you do not have any other usb-serial
  devices in the system.